A translation of Lotus Sutra from Chinese to English using ChatGPT  (date: 4 Feb 2023)

妙法蓮華經方便品第二

The Lotus Sutra, Chapter on Skillful Means, Chapter 2.

爾時，世尊從三昧安詳而起，告舍利弗：

At that time, the World-Honored One arose from his deep meditation and spoke to Sariputra:

「諸佛智慧甚深無量，其智慧門難解難入，一切聲聞、辟支佛所不能知。

 "The wisdom of all Buddhas is profound and limitless, their wisdom gates are difficult to understand and enter, and cannot be known by all Sravakas and Pratyeka-Buddhas. 
 
所以者何？佛曾親近百千萬億無數諸佛，盡行諸佛無量道法，勇猛精進名稱普聞，成就甚深未曾有法，隨宜所說意趣難解。
 
Why is this so? The Buddha has approached countless Buddhas, practicing their countless teachings with bravery and perseverance, and has achieved a profound and unprecedented path that is hard to comprehend according to what is appropriate. 
 
舍利弗！吾從成佛已來，種種因緣，種種譬喻，廣演言教無數方便，引導眾生令離諸著。

Sariputra! From the time I became a Buddha, I have used various causes, various metaphors, and extensively taught in countless ways to guide beings and lead them away from attachment. 

所以者何？如來方便知見波羅蜜皆已具足。

Why is this so? The Tathagata's methods and insights are all complete. 

舍利弗！如來知見，廣大深遠，無量無礙，力、無所畏、禪定、解脫三昧，深入無際，成就一切未曾有法。

Sariputra! The Tathagata's knowledge and understanding is vast, deep, limitless and unobstructed, his power, fearlessness, concentration, and liberation in deep meditations are boundless, and he has achieved all unprecedented paths. 

舍利弗！如來能種種分別，巧說諸法，言辭柔軟，悅可眾心。

Sariputra! The Tathagata can differentiate and skillfully speak of all phenomena, his words are soft and pleasing to all minds. Sariputra! 

舍利弗！取要言之，無量無邊未曾有法，佛悉成就。

In essence, countless and limitless unprecedented paths have all been achieved by the Buddha.











「止，舍利弗！

"Stop, Sariputra! 

不須復說。

There is no need to say more. 

所以者何？佛所成就第一希有難解之法。

Why is this so? The path achieved by the Buddha is the first and most difficult to understand. 

唯佛與佛乃能究盡諸法實相，

Only the Buddha and other Buddhas can thoroughly understand the true nature of all phenomena, 

所謂諸法如是相，如是性，如是體，如是力，如是作，如是因，如是緣，如是果，如是報，如是本末究竟等。」

including the nature, essence, form, power, action, cause, condition, result, reward, ultimate end and so on of all things."










爾時世尊欲重宣此義，而說偈言：

At that time, the World-Honored One, wishing to further emphasize this meaning, spoke a verse:

「世雄不可量，諸天及世人，一切眾生類，

"The World Honored One cannot be measured, neither by the devas nor by humans, nor by all sentient beings. 

無能知佛者。

No one can comprehend the Buddha.

佛力無所畏、解脫諸三昧，

The Buddha's power is fearless, his liberation in all meditations, 

及佛諸餘法，無能測量者。

as well as all other aspects of the Buddha, are immeasurable.

本從無數佛，具足行諸道，甚深微妙法，難見難可了。

Having associated with countless Buddhas and attained all paths, the profound and subtle dharma is difficult to see and understand.

於無量億劫，行此諸道已，道場得成果，我已悉知見。

In immeasurable kalpas, I have already walked these paths and attained the results of the path. I fully understand this.

如是大果報，種種性相義，我及十方佛，乃能知是事。

Such great results and meanings, with various natures and functions, both I and all Buddhas in the ten directions, can comprehend this matter."

是法不可示，言辭相寂滅，諸餘眾生類，無有能得解，除諸菩薩眾、信力堅固者。

This Dharma is unshowing, words and speech are stilled, other sentient beings have no understanding, except for the bodhisattva assembly with strong faith and power.

諸佛弟子眾，曾供養諸佛，一切漏已盡，住是最後身，如是諸人等，其力所不堪。

The assembly of the Buddha's disciples, who have previously made offerings to all Buddhas, have exhausted all afflictions and abide in the final body. Such people's power is insufficient.

假使滿世間，皆如舍利弗，盡思共度量，不能測佛智。

If the entire world was like Shariputra, thinking and measuring together, they could not comprehend the Buddha's wisdom.

正使滿十方，皆如舍利弗，及餘諸弟子，亦滿十方剎，盡思共度量，亦復不能知。

Even if the entire ten directions were like Shariputra, along with other disciples, filling the ten direction lands, all thinking and measuring together, still cannot comprehend.

辟支佛利智，無漏最後身，亦滿十方界，其數如竹林，斯等共一心，於億無量劫，欲思佛實智，莫能知少分。

The uncountable Buddhas of the Thus Come Ones, with their wisdom and blessings, the final body without outflows, filling the ten directions, as numerous as bamboo in a grove. These, with one heart, over countless kalpas, sought to understand the true wisdom of the Buddha, but could not know even a small portion.

新發意菩薩，供養無數佛，了達諸義趣，又能善說法，如稻麻竹葦，充滿十方剎，一心以妙智，於恒河沙劫，咸皆共思量，不能知佛智。

Newly arisen bodhisattvas, offering to countless Buddhas, realizing the various truths, and able to skillfully expound the Dharma, like rice, hemp, bamboo and reeds, filling the ten direction lands, with one mind and wonderful wisdom, over countless kalpas, thoughtfully contemplating, they cannot comprehend the Buddha's wisdom.

不退諸菩薩，其數如恒沙，一心共思求，亦復不能知。

Non-retreating bodhisattvas, as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges, with one mind seeking together, still cannot comprehend.

又告舍利弗：『無漏不思議，甚深微妙法，我今已具得，唯我知是相，十方佛亦然。

"And the Buddha told Sariputra: 'The nature of the imperishable [realm] is beyond thought and is extremely profound and subtle. I have already obtained it, and only I understand its essence. The Buddhas of the ten directions also understand it in the same way.

舍利弗當知，諸佛語無異，於佛所說法，當生大信力，世尊法久後，要當說真實。』

Sariputra, you should know that the words of all the Buddhas are not different. When the Buddha speaks of this Dharma, one should generate great faith in it. After the passing of the World-Honored One, this Dharma will need to be declared truthfully.

告諸聲聞眾，及求緣覺乘：

I now tell the voice-hearers and those seeking the path to the realization of dependent origination: 

『我令脫苦縛，逮得涅槃者。』

'I enable [sentient beings] to escape from suffering and attain nirvana.' 

佛以方便力，示以三乘教，眾生處處著，引之令得出。」

With his skillful means, the Buddha taught the three vehicles and [thus] caused all sentient beings to be liberated everywhere.”

爾時大眾中，有諸聲聞漏盡阿羅漢，阿若憍陳如等千二百人，及發聲聞、辟支佛心比丘、比丘尼、優婆塞、優婆夷，

At that time, among the crowd, there were 12 hundred Arhats, including those who had eliminated their delusions, as well as those who had become voice-hearers, pratyekabuddhas, monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. 

各作是念：「今者、世尊何故慇懃稱歎方便而作是言：

They all thought: "Why does the World-Honored One now express admiration for the expedient method and make this statement: 

『佛所得法甚深難解，有所言說意趣難知，一切聲聞、辟支佛所不能及。』

'The Dharma that the Buddha has obtained is profound and difficult to understand, with its meanings and purposes hard to know, beyond the reach of all voice-hearers and pratyekabuddhas'? 

佛說一解脫義，我等亦得此法到於涅槃，而今不知是義所趣？」

The Buddha has just explained the meaning of liberation. We have also attained this Dharma, which leads to nirvana. Why don't we understand its true nature and its ultimate goal?"

爾時舍利弗知四眾心疑，自亦未了，

At that time, Sariputta knew that the four assemblies had doubts, and he also had not yet understood. 

而白佛言：「世尊！

He spoke to the Buddha and said, "O World-Honored One! 

何因何緣慇懃稱歎諸佛第一方便、甚深微妙、難解之法？

Why did you praise the Buddha's first expedient means, which is extremely profound, subtle and difficult to understand, with such eagerness and sincerity? 

我自昔來，未曾從佛聞如是說；

I have never heard you speak like this before. 

今者四眾咸皆有疑。

Now, the four assemblies are all in doubt. 

唯願世尊敷演斯事。

Please enlighten us on this matter, O World-Honored One. 

世尊何故慇懃稱歎甚深微妙難解之法？」

Why did you praise the extremely profound, subtle, and difficult to understand expedient means?"

爾時舍利弗欲重宣此義，而說偈言：

Then, Shariputra, wanting to explain the meaning again, spoke this verse:

「慧日大聖尊，久乃說是法，自說得如是，

"Greatly Sage Sun of Wisdom, for a long time you have spoken of this dharma, and you say it is thus. 

力無畏三昧、禪定解脫等，不可思議法。

Your power is fearless in Samadhi and liberation through meditation and so on, a dharma beyond imagination.

道場所得法，無能發問者；

The dharma obtained in the path's place, there is no one capable of asking. 

我意難可測，亦無能問者。

My intention is difficult to measure, and there is also no one capable of asking.

無問而自說，

Without asking, you speak of it yourself, 

稱歎所行道，智慧甚微妙，諸佛之所得。

extolling the path you undertake, and your wisdom is very subtle, what the buddhas have obtained.

無漏諸羅漢，及求涅槃者，今皆墮疑網，

The arhats and other śrāvakas, as well as those seeking nirvana, now all fall into the net of doubt. 

佛何故說是？

Why does the Buddha speak of it like this?

其求緣覺者，比丘比丘尼，諸天龍鬼神，及乾闥婆等，

The bodhisattvas, monks and nuns, and the various gods, dragons, spirits, and gandharvas, 

相視懷猶豫，瞻仰兩足尊，

among others, all look at each other with lingering doubts, gaze at the honored feet of the Buddha, 

是事為云何，願佛為解說。

and ask, "What is this about? We hope that the Buddha will explain."

於諸聲聞眾，佛說我第一。

In the presence of the sounds-hearing assembly, the Buddha says, "I am first."

我今自於智，疑惑不能了，

I now, from wisdom, am unable to resolve my doubts and confusion. 

為是究竟法？

Is this the ultimate dharma? 

為是所行道？

Is this the path to be undertaken?

佛口所生子，合掌瞻仰待，

You, Buddha's child, wait with palms joined and gaze upward. 

願出微妙音，時為如實說。

May you produce a subtle sound and, at that time, explain it as it truly is.

諸天龍神等，其數如恒沙，

The various gods, dragons, and spirits, among others, their number is like sand grains. 

求佛諸菩薩，大數有八萬，

The many bodhisattvas seeking the Buddha, their number is eighty thousand. 

又諸萬億國，轉輪聖王至，

Furthermore, there are many billions of countries, with the turning wheel sage-kings arriving, 

合掌以敬心，欲聞具足道。」

all with palms joined and respectful hearts, wanting to hear the complete path."











爾時佛告舍利弗：「止，止！不須復說。

At that time, the Buddha told Sariputta, "Stop, stop! There's no need to speak further.

若說是事，一切世間諸天及人皆當驚疑。」

If you were to speak about this matter, all the heavens and people in the world would be filled with doubts."

舍利弗重白佛言：「世尊，唯願說之，唯願說之！

Sariputta replied to the Buddha, "World-honored One, please do speak. Please do speak!

所以者何？

The reason is that 

是會無數百千萬億阿僧祇眾生，曾見諸佛，

there are countless hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of sentient beings who have seen other Buddhas, 

諸根猛利，智慧明了，

who have sharp faculties and clear wisdom, 

聞佛所說，則能敬信。」

and who, upon hearing what the Buddha says, will be able to respect and believe it."










爾時舍利弗欲重宣此義，而說偈言：

At that time, Sariputta wanted to reiterate this meaning and recited a verse:

「法王無上尊，唯說願勿慮。

"Supreme King of the Dharma, please only speak, don't worry about anything. 

是會無量眾，有能敬信者。」

There are countless numbers of people who will be able to respect and believe."










佛復止舍利弗：

The Buddha then stopped Sariputra and said, 

「若說是事，

"If this matter is spoken of, 

一切世間天、人、阿修羅皆當驚疑，

all the celestial beings, humans, and asuras in the world will be filled with doubt, 

增上慢比丘將墜於大坑。」

and even the proud disciples will fall into a great pit."










爾時世尊重說偈言：

The Buddha then repeated a verse, saying, 

「止止不須說，

"Stop, stop, don't need to say anymore. 

我法妙難思

My teachings are mysteriously hard to understand. 

。諸增上慢者，聞必不敬信。」

Those with pride will not believe if they hear."

爾時舍利弗重白佛言：「世尊！唯願說之，唯願說之！

Sariputra then replied to the Buddha, "World-honored One, please speak! Please speak! 

今此會中，

Now in this assembly, 

如我等比百千萬億，世世已曾從佛受化。

there are people like me, who have already been transformed by the Buddha for countless generations. 

如此人等，必能敬信，長夜安隱，多所饒益。」

Such people will surely believe, have a peaceful night, and benefit greatly."










爾時舍利弗欲重宣此義，而說偈言：

At that time, Shariputra wished to expound the meaning further and recited a verse:

「無上兩足尊，願說第一法，

"The supreme two-legged honored one, I humbly request to explain the first teaching.

我為佛長子，唯垂分別說。

I, as the eldest son of the Buddha, will distinguish and explain it.

是會無量眾，能敬信此法，
There is an assembly of countless people here who can reverently believe in this teaching. 

佛已曾世世，教化如是等，

The Buddha has taught and transformed like this for countless lifetimes.

皆一心合掌，欲聽受佛語。

All of them, with a single mind and palms together, eagerly wish to listen to the Buddha's words.

我等千二百，及餘求佛者，

I, along with one thousand two hundred and others seeking the Buddha, 

願為此眾故，唯垂分別說。

wish to distinguish and explain for the sake of this assembly.

是等聞此法，則生大歡喜。」

Upon hearing this teaching, they will be filled with great joy."










爾時世尊告舍利弗：
At that time, the World-Honored One told Shariputra, 

「汝已慇懃三請，豈得不說。

"You have asked three times with eagerness, how could I not tell you? 

汝今諦聽，善思念之，吾當為汝分別解說。」

Listen carefully, and contemplate it well, I will explain it to you in detail." 

說此語時，

When he spoke these words, 

會中有比丘、比丘尼、優婆塞、優婆夷五千人等，

there were five thousand bhiksus, bhiksunis, upasakas, and upasikas in the assembly, 

即從座起，禮佛而退。

who all got up from their seats, paid respect to the Buddha, and left. 

所以者何？

Why did this happen? 

此輩罪根深重及增上慢，

These people had deeply rooted sins and were full of pride, 

未得謂得、

they had not yet attained what they called attainment, 

未證謂證，

and had not realized what they claimed to realize, 

有如此失，是以不住。

such errors caused their departure. 

世尊默然而不制止。

The World-Honored One remained silent and did not stop them.










爾時佛告舍利弗：

At that time, the Buddha told Sariputra: 

「我今此眾，無復枝葉，純有貞實。

"This assembly now has no more branches or leaves, but only truthfulness. 

舍利弗！如是增上慢人，退亦佳矣。

Sariputra, it's good for those with arrogance to leave. 

汝今善聽，當為汝說。」

Now, listen well, I will explain it to you."

舍利弗言：「唯然，世尊！願樂欲聞。」

Sariputra said: "Yes, World-Honored One! I am glad to hear it."




















佛告舍利弗：

The Buddha told Shariputra, 

「如是妙法，諸佛如來時乃說之，如優曇鉢華，

"This wonderful dharma that the Tathagatas speak of is like a lotus flower, 

時一現耳。

which only appears at a certain time. 

舍利弗！汝等當信佛之所說，言不虛妄。

Shariputra, you and others should trust the words of the Buddha and not think they are false. 










舍利弗！諸佛隨宜說法，意趣難解。

Shariputra, the Buddhas speak the dharma as appropriate, but their meanings are hard to understand. 

所以者何？

This is because 

我以無數方便，種種因緣、譬喻言辭，演說諸法。

I use countless skilful means and various reasons and illustrations in my discourse on all phenomena. 

是法非思量分別之所能解，唯有諸佛乃能知之。

This dharma cannot be understood by thinking and differentiation, only the Buddhas can know it. 

所以者何？

Why is this so? 

諸佛世尊唯以一大事因緣故出現於世。

The World-Honored Ones, the Buddhas, only appear in the world because of one great matter of causality. 

舍利弗！

Shariputra, 

云何名諸佛世尊唯以一大事因緣故出現於世？

what is meant by the World-Honored Ones, the Buddhas, only appearing in the world because of one great matter of causality? 

諸佛世尊，

The World-Honored Ones, the Buddhas, appear in the world in order to 

欲令眾生開佛知見，使得清淨故，出現於世；

awaken the wisdom of the Buddhahood in sentient beings, to make them pure, 

欲示眾生佛之知見故，出現於世；

to show them the wisdom of the Buddha, 

欲令眾生悟佛知見故，出現於世；

to enable them to understand it, 

欲令眾生入佛知見道故，出現於世。

and to enable them to enter the path of the wisdom of the Buddha. 

舍利弗！

Shariputra, 

是為諸佛以一大事因緣故出現於世。」

this is why the World-Honored Ones, the Buddhas, appear in the world because of one great matter of causality."










佛告舍利弗：

The Buddha told Sariputra: 

「諸佛如來但教化菩薩，

"The Tathagatas, the Buddhas, only teach and transform bodhisattvas. 

諸有所作，常為一事，唯以佛之知見示悟眾生。

They only act for one thing: to reveal the Buddha's knowledge and insight to awaken sentient beings.

舍利弗！

Sariputra! 

如來但以一佛乘故，為眾生說法，

The Tathagatas only speak the teachings with the one Buddha vehicle 

無有餘乘，若二、若三。

and there is no other vehicle, not two or three. 

舍利弗！一切十方諸佛，法亦如是。

Sariputra! The same is true of all Buddhas in the ten directions.

「舍利弗！過去諸佛，

"Sariputra! Past Buddhas, 

以無量無數方便，

with immeasurable and countless methods and expedients, 

種種因緣、譬喻言辭，而為眾生演說諸法，

used various causes and conditions, similes and words, to teach the Dharma to sentient beings. 

是法皆為一佛乘故。

This Dharma was all taught with the one Buddha vehicle. 

是諸眾生從諸佛聞法，究竟皆得一切種智。

Sentient beings who heard the Dharma from the Buddhas ultimately all attained all kinds of wisdom.

「舍利弗！

"Sariputra! 

未來諸佛當出於世，

Future Buddhas will also appear in the world 

亦以無量無數方便，

and, with immeasurable and countless methods and expedients, 

種種因緣、譬喻言辭，而為眾生演說諸法，

will use various causes and conditions, similes and words, to teach the Dharma to sentient beings. 

是法皆為一佛乘故。

This Dharma will be taught with the one Buddha vehicle. 

是諸眾生從佛聞法，究竟皆得一切種智。

Sentient beings who hear the Dharma from the Buddha will ultimately all attain all kinds of wisdom.

「舍利弗！

"Sariputra! 

現在十方無量百千萬億佛土中，

Right now, in the countless millions of Buddha lands in the ten directions, 

諸佛世尊多所饒益安樂眾生，

the Buddha World Honored Ones greatly benefit and bring peace to sentient beings. 

是諸佛亦以無量無數方便，

These Buddhas also use immeasurable and countless methods and expedients, 

種種因緣、譬喻言辭，而為眾生演說諸法，是法皆為一佛乘故。

various causes and conditions, similes and words, to teach the Dharma to sentient beings. 

是諸眾生從佛聞法，

This Dharma is taught with the one Buddha vehicle. 

究竟皆得一切種智。

Sentient beings who hear the Dharma from the Buddha will ultimately all attain all kinds of wisdom."







「舍利弗！

"Sariputra! 

是諸佛但教化菩薩，

The Buddhas only teach bodhisattvas, with the intention 

欲以佛之知見示眾生故，

to show sentient beings the Buddha's insights, 

欲以佛之知見悟眾生故，

to awaken sentient beings with the Buddha's insights, 

欲令眾生入佛之知見故。

and to enable sentient beings to enter into the Buddha's insights."









「舍利弗！我今亦復如是，

"Sariputra, I too, now, understand the various desires of sentient beings, 

知諸眾生有種種欲，深心所著，隨其本性，

deeply rooted in their minds, and following their inherent nature, 

以種種因緣、譬喻言辭，方便力而為說法。

use various causes and conditions, parables and words, convenient power and preaching methods. 

舍利弗！如此皆為得一佛乘、一切種智故。

Sariputra, all of this is for the purpose of obtaining the Buddha's vehicle and all kinds of wisdom."












「舍利弗！十方世界中，尚無二乘，何況有三。

舍利弗！諸佛出於五濁惡世，所謂劫濁、煩惱濁、眾生濁、見濁、命濁。

如是，舍利弗！劫濁亂時，眾生垢重，慳貪嫉妬，成就諸不善根故，諸佛以方便力，於一佛乘分別說三。









舍利弗！若我弟子，自謂阿羅漢、辟支佛者，不聞不知諸佛如來但教化菩薩事，此非佛弟子，非阿羅漢，非辟支佛。

「又，舍利弗！是諸比丘、比丘尼，自謂已得阿羅漢，是最後身，究竟涅槃，便不復志求阿耨多羅三藐三菩提，當知此輩皆是增上慢人。所以者何。

若有比丘實得阿羅漢，若不信此法，無有是處。

除佛滅度後，現前無佛。所以者何？

佛滅度後，如是等經受持讀誦解義者，是人難得。

若遇餘佛，於此法中便得決了。

舍利弗！汝等當一心信解受持佛語。諸佛如來言無虛妄，無有餘乘，唯一佛乘。」

爾時世尊欲重宣此義，而說偈言：

「比丘比丘尼，　　有懷增上慢，
優婆塞我慢，　　優婆夷不信，
如是四眾等，　　其數有五千，
不自見其過，　　於戒有缺漏，
護惜其瑕疵。　　是小智已出，
眾中之糟糠，　　佛威德故去，
斯人尠福德，　　不堪受是法。
此眾無枝葉，　　唯有諸貞實。
舍利弗善聽！　　諸佛所得法，
無量方便力，　　而為眾生說。
眾生心所念，　　種種所行道，
若干諸欲性，　　先世善惡業。
佛悉知是已，　　以諸緣譬喻、
言辭方便力，　　令一切歡喜。
或說修多羅、　　伽陀及本事、
本生未曾有，　　亦說於因緣、
譬喻并祇夜、　　優波提舍經。
鈍根樂小法，　　貪著於生死，
於諸無量佛，　　不行深妙道，
眾苦所惱亂，　　為是說涅槃。
我設是方便，　　令得入佛慧，
未曾說汝等，　　當得成佛道。
所以未曾說，　　說時未至故，
今正是其時，　　決定說大乘。
我此九部法，　　隨順眾生說，
入大乘為本，　　以故說是經。
有佛子心淨，　　柔軟亦利根，
無量諸佛所，　　而行深妙道。
為此諸佛子，　　說是大乘經，
我記如是人，　　來世成佛道，
以深心念佛，　　修持淨戒故。
此等聞得佛，　　大喜充遍身，
佛知彼心行，　　故為說大乘。
聲聞若菩薩，　　聞我所說法，
乃至於一偈，　　皆成佛無疑。
十方佛土中，　　唯有一乘法，
無二亦無三。　　除佛方便說。
但以假名字，　　引導於眾生，
說佛智慧故，　　諸佛出於世。
唯此一事實，　　餘二則非真，
終不以小乘，　　濟度於眾生。
佛自住大乘，　　如其所得法，
定慧力莊嚴，　　以此度眾生。
自證無上道，　　大乘平等法，
若以小乘化，　　乃至於一人，
我則墮慳貪，　　此事為不可。
若人信歸佛，　　如來不欺誑，
亦無貪嫉意，　　斷諸法中惡。
故佛於十方，　　而獨無所畏。
我以相嚴身，　　光明照世間，
無量眾所尊，　　為說實相印。
舍利弗當知，　　我本立誓願，
欲令一切眾，　　如我等無異。
如我昔所願，　　今者已滿足，
化一切眾生，　　皆令入佛道。
若我遇眾生，　　盡教以佛道，
無智者錯亂，　　迷惑不受教。
我知此眾生，　　未曾修善本，
堅著於五欲，　　癡愛故生惱。
以諸欲因緣，　　墜墮三惡道，
輪迴六趣中，　　備受諸苦毒，
受胎之微形，　　世世常增長。
薄德少福人，　　眾苦所逼迫，
入邪見稠林，　　若有若無等。
依止此諸見，　　具足六十二，
深著虛妄法，　　堅受不可捨，
我慢自矜高，　　諂曲心不實，
於千萬億劫，　　不聞佛名字，
亦不聞正法，　　如是人難度。
是故舍利弗！　　我為設方便，
說諸盡苦道，　　示之以涅槃。
我雖說涅槃，　　是亦非真滅，
諸法從本來，　　常自寂滅相。
佛子行道已，　　來世得作佛，
我有方便力，　　開示三乘法。
一切諸世尊，　　皆說一乘道，
今此諸大眾，　　皆應除疑惑，
諸佛語無異，　　唯一無二乘。
過去無數劫，　　無量滅度佛，
百千萬億種，　　其數不可量。
如是諸世尊，　　種種緣譬喻，
無數方便力，　　演說諸法相。
是諸世尊等，　　皆說一乘法，
化無量眾生，　　令入於佛道。
又諸大聖主，　　知一切世間，
天人群生類，　　深心之所欲，
更以異方便，　　助顯第一義。
若有眾生類，　　值諸過去佛，
若聞法布施，　　或持戒忍辱、
精進禪智等，　　種種修福慧。
如是諸人等，　　皆已成佛道。
諸佛滅度已，　　若人善軟心，
如是諸眾生，　　皆已成佛道。
諸佛滅度已，　　供養舍利者，
起萬億種塔，　　金銀及頗梨、
車𤦲與馬腦、　　玫瑰琉璃珠，
清淨廣嚴飾，　　莊校於諸塔。
或有起石廟，　　栴檀及沈水，
木櫁并餘材，　　塼瓦泥土等。
若於曠野中，　　積土成佛廟，
乃至童子戲，　　聚沙為佛塔，
如是諸人等，　　皆已成佛道。
若人為佛故，　　建立諸形像，
刻雕成眾相，　　皆已成佛道。
或以七寶成，　　鍮石赤白銅、
白鑞及鉛錫，　　鐵木及與泥，
或以膠漆布，　　嚴飾作佛像，
如是諸人等，　　皆已成佛道。
彩畫作佛像，　　百福莊嚴相，
自作若使人，　　皆已成佛道。
乃至童子戲，　　若草木及筆，
或以指爪甲，　　而畫作佛像，
如是諸人等，　　漸漸積功德，
具足大悲心，　　皆已成佛道。
但化諸菩薩，　　度脫無量眾。
若人於塔廟、　　寶像及畫像，
以華香幡蓋，　　敬心而供養。
若使人作樂，　　擊鼓吹角貝，
簫笛琴箜篌、　　琵琶鐃銅鈸，
如是眾妙音，　　盡持以供養。
或以歡喜心，　　歌唄頌佛德，
乃至一小音，　　皆已成佛道。
若人散亂心，　　乃至以一華，
供養於畫像，　　漸見無數佛。
或有人禮拜，　　或復但合掌，
乃至舉一手，　　或復小低頭，
以此供養像，　　漸見無量佛。
自成無上道，　　廣度無數眾，
入無餘涅槃，　　如薪盡火滅。
若人散亂心，　　入於塔廟中，
一稱南無佛，　　皆已成佛道。
於諸過去佛，　　在世或滅度，
若有聞是法，　　皆已成佛道。
未來諸世尊，　　其數無有量，
是諸如來等，　　亦方便說法。
一切諸如來，　　以無量方便，
度脫諸眾生，　　入佛無漏智，
若有聞法者，　　無一不成佛。
諸佛本誓願，　　我所行佛道，
普欲令眾生，　　亦同得此道。
未來世諸佛，　　雖說百千億，
無數諸法門，　　其實為一乘。
諸佛兩足尊，　　知法常無性，
佛種從緣起，　　是故說一乘。
是法住法位，　　世間相常住，
於道場知已，　　導師方便說。
天人所供養，　　現在十方佛，
其數如恒沙，　　出現於世間，
安隱眾生故，　　亦說如是法。
知第一寂滅，　　以方便力故，
雖示種種道，　　其實為佛乘。
知眾生諸行，　　深心之所念，
過去所習業，　　欲性精進力，
及諸根利鈍，　　以種種因緣、
譬喻亦言辭，　　隨應方便說。
今我亦如是，　　安隱眾生故，
以種種法門，　　宣示於佛道。
我以智慧力，　　知眾生性欲，
方便說諸法，　　皆令得歡喜。
舍利弗當知！　　我以佛眼觀，
見六道眾生，　　貧窮無福慧，
入生死嶮道，　　相續苦不斷，
深著於五欲，　　如犛牛愛尾，
以貪愛自蔽，　　盲瞑無所見。
不求大勢佛，　　及與斷苦法，
深入諸邪見，　　以苦欲捨苦，
為是眾生故，　　而起大悲心。
我始坐道場，　　觀樹亦經行，
於三七日中，　　思惟如是事，
我所得智慧，　　微妙最第一。
眾生諸根鈍，　　著樂癡所盲，
如斯之等類，　　云何而可度？
爾時諸梵王，　　及諸天帝釋、
護世四天王，　　及大自在天，
并餘諸天眾，　　眷屬百千萬，
恭敬合掌禮，　　請我轉法輪。
我即自思惟：　　『若但讚佛乘，
眾生沒在苦，　　不能信是法；
破法不信故，　　墜於三惡道。
我寧不說法，　　疾入於涅槃。
尋念過去佛，　　所行方便力，
我今所得道，　　亦應說三乘。』
作是思惟時，　　十方佛皆現，
梵音慰喻我：　　『善哉釋迦文！
第一之導師，　　得是無上法，
隨諸一切佛，　　而用方便力。
我等亦皆得，　　最妙第一法，
為諸眾生類、　　分別說三乘。
少智樂小法，　　不自信作佛，
是故以方便，　　分別說諸果。
雖復說三乘，　　但為教菩薩。』
舍利弗當知！　　我聞聖師子，
深淨微妙音，　　喜稱南無佛。
復作如是念：　　『我出濁惡世，
如諸佛所說，　　我亦隨順行。』
思惟是事已，　　即趣波羅柰。
諸法寂滅相，　　不可以言宣，
以方便力故，　　為五比丘說。
是名轉法輪，　　便有涅槃音，
及以阿羅漢，　　法僧差別名。
從久遠劫來，　　讚示涅槃法，
生死苦永盡，　　我常如是說。
舍利弗當知！　　我見佛子等，
志求佛道者，　　無量千萬億，
咸以恭敬心，　　皆來至佛所，
曾從諸佛聞，　　方便所說法。
我即作是念：　　『如來所以出，
為說佛慧故，　　今正是其時。』
舍利弗當知！　　鈍根小智人、
著相憍慢者，　　不能信是法。
今我喜無畏，　　於諸菩薩中，
正直捨方便，　　但說無上道。
菩薩聞是法，　　疑網皆已除，
千二百羅漢，　　悉亦當作佛。
如三世諸佛，　　說法之儀式，
我今亦如是，　　說無分別法。
諸佛興出世，　　懸遠值遇難，
正使出于世，　　說是法復難。
無量無數劫，　　聞是法亦難，
能聽是法者，　　斯人亦復難。
譬如優曇花，　　一切皆愛樂，
天人所希有，　　時時乃一出。
聞法歡喜讚，　　乃至發一言，
則為已供養，　　一切三世佛，
是人甚希有，　　過於優曇花。
汝等勿有疑，　　我為諸法王，
普告諸大眾，　　但以一乘道，
教化諸菩薩，　　無聲聞弟子。
汝等舍利弗，　　聲聞及菩薩，
當知是妙法，　　諸佛之祕要。
以五濁惡世，　　但樂著諸欲，
如是等眾生，　　終不求佛道。
當來世惡人，　　聞佛說一乘，
迷惑不信受，　　破法墮惡道。
有慚愧清淨，　　志求佛道者，
當為如是等，　　廣讚一乘道。
舍利弗當知！　　諸佛法如是，
以萬億方便，　　隨宜而說法，
其不習學者，　　不能曉了此。
汝等既已知，　　諸佛世之師，
隨宜方便事，　　無復諸疑惑，
心生大歡喜，　　自知當作佛。」

妙法蓮華經卷第一
